So, hello. Welcome to the Public Code and Digital Public Goods Dev Room. My name is
Elena Finlay-Diracht. I'm here at the Foundation for Public Code. This is my colleague.
Hello, everyone. Nice to meet you. I'm Amreen Taneja, the Standards Manager at Digital
Public Goods Alliance. And there I manage, lead and promote the Digital Public Goods
Standard. So, very excited for this Dev Room today.
And I'm Jan Einley. I'm also at the Foundation for Public Code and I'll talk later.
Cool. And I'm going to... So, in case there's any confusion about what we're doing here and who
we are, this is a Dev Room dedicated to everyone developing public code. That is open source
code that implements public policy used for the public good and by public organizations like
governments, public administrations and state corporations. Digital Public Goods, DPGs, are
open source software, open standards, open data, open AI systems and open content collections
that help meet the sustainable development goals. So, we have a couple of housekeeping notes.
Most importantly, the FOSM Code of Conduct applies here. So, please be respectful in the space.
Oh, sorry, this way. On this side of the... Okay. Secondly, even more. Okay.
All right. We have a window open for ventilation. That's to make the space a bit more comfortable.
If people would like more than one window open, I'm happy to hop on that. We're going to leave
the window open all day in any case. And that moves us to the third housekeeping point,
which is that if you have any questions, if anything comes up today, talk to Jan, Amrine or me.
And that's it. So, on to Amrine. Thank you so much. I'll just take a moment and get this up.
Okay. So, well, I think moving on. So, I've already introduced myself. So, first of all,
I'd like to warmly welcome you all to this dev room today. First things first, I'd like to share
with you a bit about the Digital Public Goods Alliance for those of you who are new to this
organization and concept. So, we are a multi-stakeholder initiative which was launched in 2019. And our
mission is to accelerate the attainment of sustainable development goals by facilitating
the discovery, the development and the use of digital public goods, which are essentially
all open source solutions. So, I'll share about this as we move forward, but I'd like to kick off
this conversation by introducing you to the Digital Public Goods Standard. Right. So, just to give you
a little bit of context of where this concept and this definition came from. So, the DPG definition
was actually laid out by the UN Secretary General. And there are five kinds of open source digital
solutions that are recognized or can be certified as DPGs. So, these are open source software,
open data, open content, open standards and open AI models. So, we have a set of nine indicators,
right, that make up the standard. And I'll share a bit about each of them with you today. So,
the first one is SDG relevance, right. So, this is a very broad topic. So, essentially any application
that wants to do good for the society in some form or the other will come under one or the other
SDG, right. So, what we expect from you here is, first of all, to establish a clear contribution
to either one or more SDG and also explain how your application will be seeking to do that and
achieve that. And then also we have an SDG tracker tool, which I'll be sharing in the presentation
as we move forward. The second indicator is open licensing, right. So, the DPG standard has
a set of specific licenses that we accept. And all licenses, supposing that are, you know,
they're approved by OSI are there for software. We have Creative Commons licenses for open content.
And then we have various other licenses for AI systems as well as data. So, because there's
positive time, I'll not get into too much detail right now, but I'd love for you to have this
conversation with me later on. I'll move on to the third indicator for now, that is clear ownership.
So, that essentially what we mean by this is, the DPG status needs to be renewed every year, right.
So, you have to send out an application everywhere every year and, you know, your application needs
to be up to date with the standard that we have created. So, we need to know who the owner of
this application is and it could be either a person or an organization. Both are acceptable.
And what you have to provide to us is a proof of ownership, which is anyway a legal requirement
for the application. Now, fourth indicator talks about platform independence, right. So,
this is a tricky one, right. And the goal here is for vendor lock-in to be avoided. And we prefer
for everything to be open source, but let's say you have a proprietary component within your
application. So, when you apply for a DPG, what you have to do is provide an alternative open
source component to this and explain how it should be implemented and the condition being that it
should be relatively easily implementable, right. That solution should be easily implementable for
anybody who has enough technical knowledge about this. So, we in fact have external, you know,
facilitators and experts for this particular indicator. We have them with us today as well. So,
Ivan, that's for you. So, if you have any questions around this indicator, please feel
free to contact him. Now, coming to indicator number five, that is documentation. So, this is
fairly straightforward, right. So, it basically means that you need to have all your documentation
in place. So, this can be in the form of a repository or, you know, on your website or in
the form of some good book. And it should essentially have enough detail, you know, that
someone with enough technical knowledge should be able to deploy the solution by themselves. That
is the requirement that we have. Now, moving on to indicator number six. So, that basically talks
about mechanism for extracting data, right. So, if your project collects any sort of non-PII data,
then it should be possible to access it through non-properity formats. That is the condition
that we have. And now, coming to indicator number seven. So, this is adherence to privacy and
applicable laws. In fact, I have some news around this indicator which I'll be sharing with you
later on. So, essentially what this means is that your application, it should be compliant with,
you know, any of the privacy laws that are there in the jurisdiction where the application has
been created or where you intend to operate. So, if it's Euro, it'll be GDPR or anywhere else,
you have to provide proof of compliance, of course. And that can be through, you know,
providing us a terms of use or privacy policy. And of course, these things are held on a
case-to-case basis. So, you know, you'll be speaking to our reviewers around this. And once
you satisfy the conditions, then we move forward. Now, coming to indicator number eight. So, this
is adherence to standards and best practices. So, essentially, any standards and best practices
that apply to the industry where your solution belongs, you have to adhere to them and you
have to provide some proof of adherence as well to us. And lastly, coming to indicator number nine.
So, this is do-no-harm by design. So, do-no-harm by design essentially means that we, you know,
we say design because we don't look at the implications that will be there, you know,
down the line somewhere which are completely out of your control, right? So, we look at how the
digital solution is being used or rather how it's being built and not how it's being used. So,
that is what we kind of focus on. Now, moving on to the next slide. So, this is about how do you
become a DPG. So, this is a three-step procedure, right? So, first stage is nomination. So,
nomination essentially means that you can either nominate yourself or a third party can nominate
you. And the second stage after this is technical review. Of course, this is a very, very rigorous
process. We have level one and level two reviewers who go through, you know, your application. And
if your application satisfies all the conditions, then, you know, your application is essentially
certified as a digital public good and it is recognized on the registry.
So, like I mentioned, step one. So, we have a five-minute eligibility test that anybody can
take and you can figure out whether your solution is at the outset capable of becoming a
digital public good or not. Step two is the nomination. So, this is what the application
form looks like and this needs to be filled up as per the criteria that we just spoke about.
And this is step three. So, success. So, if, you know, your application is selected, it is added
to the DPG registry and this is the SDG tool tracker that I was talking about. So, this is
where we have 150 of the DPGs categorized and arranged as per the various SDGs that they are
striving to contribute towards. So, now coming to call for experts. So, I was mentioning about
something about indicator seven. So, this is where, you know, the standard is entering phase
two of operations. So, what this means is that we are going to be fine-tuning critical indicators
of the standard through two expert groups that we are launching, one on privacy and one on AI.
You'll see this poster across the dev room and outside as well. So, if you're interested,
please feel free to scan the QR code and apply. And these are the requirements. So,
if you're a subject matter expert in either privacy or AI with a technical background,
legal background, academia or, you know, any other background which you think would be a good fit,
please do apply. And it's not much of a time contribution. It's about three to four hours
for this knowledge partnership. And of course, if there is previous experience in standard
making, then that is also highly encouraged. And with that, it comes to an end from my side.
I would like to introduce Yan now. So, who is our DPGA member as well as the co-host here for this
dev room. Thank you so much. Thank you, Amreen. And I'll come from the Foundation for Public Code.
We're a non-profit. We're based in Amsterdam, but we aim to work globally. Just last year,
we started chapter in North America. And we exist to help the public organizations who already
decided that they want to work with open source, develop open source, to help them do that in a
collaborative way. So, ensuring that also that anyone can reuse what they have been doing.
And to do that, we have the standard for public code. Here are some old versions. We have some
new paper versions here, if you'd like. Just last month, we released 08.0. And it has a number of
different criteria in it, certification criteria. I'm not going to go in as deep as Amreen did.
But this is what we use to sort of like certify that a code base is able or easy to collaborate on.
And our philosophy is that it shouldn't contain any surprises. It should be more or less the best
practices in the open source business. So, you're probably already doing most of it already. And
then there's probably also a lot of shortcuts that you have made to save some time that you're not
doing, but that you wish you had the time to do. We have collected them all here, because that varies
over. And if you comply with the standard, our thesis is it will be very easy for someone to
come up and collaborate with you. It's of course an open standard itself. It's cc0. You can start
using it immediately. You don't need our permission to do anything. And you don't need us to come talk
to you. Reuse it, adapt it to your needs. If you find that something is, oh, this is shaping with me,
please contribute back to us so we can continue to improve it with your feedback.
And these are sort of like the type of requirements that we have. And just as
Amrin showed with the DPG standard, we also have a self-assessment test that you can do. There's
just 10 yes or no questions to give you an idea how close you are to dig into it completely,
because in the entire standard it's like 116 requirements or something like that.
And there's a review template, of course, and a checklist to easily check what you're doing. And
we list everyone who is compliant on this website. Today it's a list of zero, but it is a list still.
But we also include right now everyone who has said, oh, we are aiming for this goal. So everyone
who has the ambition gets listed there. And then just a tiny little thing. We also have a number
of governance game decks. It's a little sort of a game you can play with your community to figure
out how do we want to do with our governance. And we're giving them out from the small fee of
signing up to our newsletter. And with that, I want to introduce our first speaker from the day.